It'll get us nicely to quarter past.
I'm sorry, if you don't mind, we were just gonna stay
sitting here as they're on.
So
Actually, uh, It's good online.
Just need to check. Yeah, there we go.
Right, here we go. We've got the Dr. Bourne.
Um, you're just Yes. And you're, you're now live.
So, welcome. Um, I'm Greg O'Connor, the chair
of the committee oversee, um, Greg Fleming, MP
Green List MP based in Christchurch.
Paul Garcia, national MP for New Link.
Alright. Small but talented group. We'd like to think.
Right. Excellent. So thank you Shane.
Um, now the floor, uh, if you can, uh, just, we,
we've read your submission, so we're just, uh,
if you can speak to that and, uh,
very pleased to hear from you.
Yep. Well, I'm Koto, uh,
privileged to be here this afternoon.
Uh, just for a way of introduction, my name is Dr.
Joe Bourne. I'm the Chief Medical Officer
at the Ministry of Health.
And I'm also, um, a practicing, um, gp,
so have clinical experience, um, with, uh, supporting women
with issues relating to menopause.
Uh, the first thing I wanted to do was just to, um,
recognize the significance of menopause
and the impact that menopause has on women.
Um, during the de development
of the women's health strategy.
We heard from numerous women with lived experience
of menopause and really got some, um,
good insights into the impact
that this has on their daily lives.
Um, as health systems steward, we expect
that New Zealanders should have ex access to a range
of services, um,
and healthcare providers that will meet, meet women's needs,
um, which can be incredibly varied when they're
presenting with menopause.
Um, the ministry we are gonna speak, uh, predominantly
to the first part of the petition, which, um, talks about,
uh, medical education
and education for general practitioners.
Um, the ministry's role within the, uh, health system is not
to, um, provide or create that content,
but what we do have is good relationships
with both the universities
and the college of general practitioners
who provide those two, um, areas of education.
And we've got a great deal of confidence that women's health
and menopause in particular is well co covered by both
of their curriculums.
Um, the, uh, I was gonna observe as well
that this is an evolving field of medicine.
Um, the, uh, committee may be aware that
several years ago now would've been at the beginning
of the two thousands, there was some controversy around some
of the treatments available for menopause,
and that was around the time
that I was qualifying as a doctor.
And I saw at that time many fewer women presenting
with issues relating to menopause.
And I think that there was a loss of a loss of confidence
amongst women that the health system would respond
to the, to their needs.
But I've seen a definite change in my own practice over the
last two, three or four years with far more women, um,
presenting, um, with a range of conditions
and feeling increasingly empowered
to approach the health system for assistance
with the symptoms that they're getting.
Um, I have spoken with the College of gps, um,
about the issue and, um, their formal education programs
and their continuing professional development, um, presents
multiple options for people to upskill in this area.
Um, I attended the general practice, uh,
continuing medical medical education conference in Rotter,
um, which is one of two conferences held annually
and attended a session myself on, uh, menopause.
So I'm, I'm confident that there are plenty
of offerings out there for general practitioners
to be able to upskill.
I did want to, um, also point out
that we al we now have nurse practitioners, uh,
working within general practice.
They're able to assess, assess women and to prescribe.
Um, so that is another, uh, group of health professionals
who are also able to contribute in this area.
Um, so I think that, uh,
this is undoubtedly an important area.
I believe that there are many, um, as well
as within the formal curriculums in undergraduate training
and in postgraduate general practice training, though, uh,
menopause is covered within those curriculums
and that there are a range of, um, additional education,
uh, opportunities available to general practitioners
and to nurse practitioners.
Uh, once they've got their vocational specialist training,
we see a number
of practitioners now taking on menopause
as a subspecialty.
Um, and that's increasing the options available to, um,
women to be able to go and, uh, see practitioners.
I suppose one of the challenges
that we have is the presentations can frequently be complex
with multiple symptoms.
Um, and some of the, uh, practices need to think about
how they can tailor the way
that they have their consultations in order to be able
to meet all of the needs that women present with,
which can be challenging within a 15 minute
consultation construct.
But practices are increasingly moving away to provide more
flexible, um, options, uh, for their consultations.
And through continuity of care,
you can also see women repeatedly.
And that tends to be the way that I've approached this
with a number of patients that I've been supporting.
Um, the last thing that I would say is, uh, it's great
to have people developing this, uh, specialist knowledge,
but it is absolutely vital that
a generalist is involved in the care,
and I would consider myself not an expert in, in menopause,
but a general practitioner who has sufficient knowledge
to support a lot of women, um, in this area.
But it is really key that they do see a generalist
because not all women presenting at this stage of life,
the diagnosis will be menopause.
Um, so we need to be able to be thinking outside of
that narrow diagnosis so as not
to miss other significant conditions that are treatable
that might be causing similar symptoms.
So really, really important
that we don't start considering all women presenting at this
stage of life and with a range of symptoms, it's menopause
by default, but considering all of those potential diagnosis
that be could be causing those symptoms.
And that's probably enough of me just talking
and I'll be really happy to answer any questions.
The committee has, um, Emma Prestige is on the call also.
She's the group manager, uh, for policy
and strategy for within the ministry, uh,
in the primary care field.
So she's also able
to support any questions that the committee has.
Thank you and welcome Emma. Um, yes.
Yeah, thank you so much.
And for the mahi you do, um, it's so important that we,
you know, have access to great healthcare
and we can tell you really care about your, um, patients
and clients When you talked about, um,
these other options available, you know,
once they've got 'em through, um, training to become a gp,
um, that there's other options available.
I think I'm, I'm just interested to know like
how readily available are they
and how much they are, you know, taken up, um, particularly
by, um, gps Yeah.
Across, across the country,
but in places like rural areas where we know that, um,
healthcare, um, outcomes are, you know,
disproportionate to, um, to our average.
And you know, what it makes me think about is like
how in New Zealand endometriosis is, takes eight years
for women on average to get diagnosed with it.
And so like, is this an opportunity for us to do better
for women and women's health to actually increase, um,
you know, that knowledge around, um,
menopause and perimenopause?
Yeah, tha thanks for the question.
Um, in terms of being able to support rural practitioners
to upskill, there are a number of organizations that offer,
um, education in this area.
So there's one particular one called the Goodfellow Unit,
which runs webinars online that, uh,
anyone in the country can sign up to.
So your location in the country isn't a barrier
to accessing those as well, uh, at all.
Um, we also have a tool called Health Pathways,
which was developed in Canterbury, uh,
and is now available throughout New Zealand.
And that has, uh, clinical pathways that, um,
talk a clinician through the investigations, um,
the examinations and the treatment options
for women with menopause.
And in many areas of the country,
they've not only got access to a base pathway,
which gives the clinical, um, guidance,
but they've also localized those pathways so that clinicians
who perhaps don't have the same level of expertise can see
where they can guide patients to in the system locally
and, uh, if they have somebody that needs additional levels
of care that go beyond the generalist scope.
So I think that those options
to support rural practitioners are also there.
And as I mentioned, the advent of nurse practitioners
as a growing workforce is also really helpful, um,
particularly because that profession is, um,
female dominated.
So you're, you are bringing through more people who are able
to, um, I don't think we should ever, um, uh,
make too many assumptions based on gender,
but there is a group of, um, practitioners who may be able
to more easily empathize with women who are presenting.
So I think the general direction is good and,
but I will acknowledge that there was unfortunately some,
some research that was misinterpreted at the start
of the century, which did take us back somewhat
and did suggest that some treatments, particularly HRT,
had the potential to cause as much harm as they do good.
And we've now unpicked that.
So we're able to offer women far better advice as
to the risks and benefits of, of those medications.
That's, and, And if I could just ask, is the, um, the,
the science in this area, um, increasing at a,
at a pretty good rate, um, like I, I know that you,
you've talked about the HRT, is, is that sort of been, well,
is the science increasing in this area?
Absolutely. Um, there is significant amount
of research in this area, um, a lot of interest amongst, um,
clinicians and researchers that are constantly, uh,
looking at other ways of, um,
treating alleviating symptoms. Really.
Oh, sorry. No, that's great. Thank you.
Just a, um, follow up question.
Um, so with the, these pathways goodfellow
and, um, health Pathways for Education,
do you know the uptake of those in terms of like general gps
and like who's actually,
because I think it's wonderful
that they can access it anywhere
and if then yeah, it would be good to see the uptake
and then if there could be some like educational promotion
around that so that more people are uptaking them, um, so
that we are giving that best healthcare to our women?
Yeah, look, I I think that that's a good challenge.
Um, we, I don't have access to the data that, um, so
and a, an organization like the Good Fellow, um, uh,
good fellow would have in terms of the number of people
that have signed up, but I,
I could certainly inquire of them.
We've got good relationships with the Good fellow unit.
I also know that the Royal College of, um,
general practitioners send out a weekly newsletter plus a
monthly more in depth, um, publication.
And both of those promote, um,
continuing professional development opportunities on a
pretty constant basis.
The conference that I described in Rotter
and a, uh, another conference that they have
that mirrors the program down in the south island has
thousands of practitioners turning up
and their, um, their program is published beforehand.
Again, I could probably reach out into those organizations
to know, get an idea of exactly
how many are attending those sessions.
Um, but I could certainly say that the session
that I was in in June, July last week had to be run twice.
Um, and the, the, the, uh, area where it was
that seated 150 people was packed on both of those sessions,
it was standing room only at the back.
Um, and I think it's an area where consumers
and patients themselves actually drive the demand.
Um, I I can, I can safely say three, four years ago, well,
COVID, um, not withstanding, um, as a male gp,
I would've seen maybe two
or three presentations over a year, um,
with women presenting with menopause.
Now I would be seeing that number a month.
Um, so it, it, I, I think that this is an area
where there's a really, I mean, clearly the,
the petitioners wouldn't have submitted this petition if
they don't feel that there is still significant unmet need.
But I see a lot of, um,
symmetry in consumers requesting additional, um, help
with symptoms and the system responding to that
by providing more education opportunities.
As gps, we have to identify
what our learning needs are every year.
And one of the things that I did,
and the reason why I attended that session at the conference
in Rotter is
because I was having so many more people presenting,
I identified that as a learning need and then, um, uh,
and then attended relevant training.
That's fantastic. So women are no longer, um,
suffering in silence it seems.
Um, and we've got, you know, conversations
that we've heard from women going to their gps
and, um, them almost assuming
that women already know what is going on, so things like,
oh, you know, it's just your age
and these things are changing,
but they're not that follow up.
And some people don't actually have the, um, impetus to say,
and what do you mean by that?
There's sort of an assumption that they should already know,
which unfortunately isn't, but we're getting better at it.
So, um, I guess that was more
of a statement rather than a question.
Alright. Um, oh,
Sorry. Okay. Unless you
wanted to comment on that.
No, I, IWI was just, um, gonna reflect the, the key to,
um, medicine is understanding the impact
of the symptoms on a person's life,
and that's what we're encouraged to do.
And then that can lead us to what are the potential, um,
options, um, for Solu you, you know,
to create some solutions for those issues.
Oh, thank, I just got one quick one. Um, pal Garcia,
Um, Dr.
Bne and Emma, uh, firstly thank you
for the work that you do.
Um, and, and, uh, it's very interesting to see
that this space is expanding quickly.
Um, uh, the driver for the petition, um,
was heard distress,
the petitioner's distress in finding help.
Um, and while it's good to know what's developing, um,
would the ministry have, um, on its website
or would gps, uh, have on their practices, uh,
visual, uh, connectors?
So if a woman walks in, uh, in distress, uh,
and is coming in for the first time
and doesn't know what she has, would,
would there be anything visual in clinics, uh, today
or, you know, something that can help someone ask?
Because I think most of the time women
may not know how to ask.
Yeah, look, I, I think that's a,
that's a really interesting challenge.
I would, I would suggest
that not many clinics would have anything specific
on menopause within their waiting rooms,
unless within that clinic they had developed a sort of a,
um, a specialist clinic within, within that practice.
So I think that that's, that's a good challenge.
My, my only caution would be, as I said
before, not all symptoms that are presenting
that might be menopause are menopause.
Mm-hmm. And so I think the key is ensuring
that we have a system that is responsive enough
that people present whatever their condition,
and then between the clinician
and the patient, they can work through the range of options
that could be causing that.
So that's very much, uh,
and I know I shouldn't be speaking just about my approach,
but I'm, you know, I think the vast majority
of clinicians approach things in the same way.
So menopause has to be part of our differential diagnosis,
but cannot be the only thing.
And sometimes some
of the interactions is when a person comes in
and says, this is what I have
and this is all I'm interested in, it can lead to a pathway,
which means another potential diagnosis is mixed missed,
particularly with something like abnormal vaginal bleeding
at this stage of life, which may be linked
to the perimenopause, you know, going into menopause, but,
but could be a, a symptom
of something more syner like a uterine cancer.
So I, I understand what you're saying
and I suppose I'm just trying to convey a, a degree
of the nuance that we need to consider so
that we don't develop a system
that thinks any woman presenting at this stage of life,
it's menopause until proved otherwise.
Okay. 'cause that could lead
to some unintended consequences.
Thank you. Oh, look, thank you very much, uh, Dr.
B, um, uh, it's, uh, been
very interesting to say the least.
Uh, we'll, we'll be now reporting
back to Parliament on this.
So thank you very much for your time.
Thank you.